DOCS-906:  Document `wheeled-odometry` model of movement sensor (#1734)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/components/movement-sensor/wheeled-odometry.md

---
title: "Configure a wheeled-odometry movement sensor"
linkTitle: "wheeled-odometry"
type: "docs"
description: "Configure a wheeled-odometry movement sensor."
images: ["/icons/components/imu.svg"]

> tags: ["movement sensor", "components", "movement sensor"]

Author: ```suggestion
tags: ["movement sensor", "components", "encoder", "motor", "base"]
```

# SMEs: Rand, Martha
---

Configure a `wheeled-odometry` movement sensor to implement _wheeled odometry_ on your robot.

_Wheeled odometry_ is the estimation of the rate of change of position, orientation, linear velocity, and angular velocity using the dimensions of a base, calculated by measuring the movement of the motors through encoders.

> This model of movement sensor uses [encoders](/components/encoder/) from [position reporting motors](/components/motor/) to get an odometry estimate of a wheeled base as it moves.

Author: ```suggestion
You don't have to have a specific piece of movement sensor hardware to implement this model of movement sensor on your robot. 
This model of movement sensor uses [encoders](/components/encoder/) from [position reporting motors](/components/motor/) to get an odometry estimate of a wheeled base as it moves.
```

---
title: "Configure a wheeled-odometry movement sensor"
linkTitle: "wheeled-odometry"
type: "docs"
description: "Configure a wheeled-odometry movement sensor."
images: ["/icons/components/imu.svg"]

> tags: ["movement sensor", "components", "movement sensor"]

Reviewer: nit: extra `movement sensor`

Author: haha removed! MAking better tags

# SMEs: Rand, Martha
---

Configure a `wheeled-odometry` movement sensor to implement _wheeled odometry_ on your robot.

_Wheeled odometry_ is the estimation of the rate of change of position, orientation, linear velocity, and angular velocity using the dimensions of a base, calculated by measuring the movement of the motors through encoders.

> You don't have to have a specific piece of movement sensor hardware to implement this model of movement sensor on your robot. 

Author: ```suggestion
You don't have to have a specific piece of movement sensor hardware to implement `wheeledodometry` on your robot. 
```

> This model uses [encoders](/components/encoder/) from [position reporting motors](/components/motor/) to get an odometry estimate of a wheeled base as it moves.

Reviewer: What does `This model` refer to? `wheeled-odometry` is introduced as a `movement sensor`.

Author: Added clarification that it is movement sensor

> This model uses [encoders](/components/encoder/) from [position reporting motors](/components/motor/) to get an odometry estimate of a wheeled base as it moves.

Author: ```suggestion
This model of movement sensor uses [encoders](/components/encoder/) from [position reporting motors](/components/motor/) to get an odometry estimate of a wheeled base as it moves.
```

> Because of this method of estimation, you don't have to have a specific piece of movement sensor hardware to implement `wheeledodometry` on your robot. 

Author: ```suggestion
Because of this method of estimation, you don't have to have a specific piece of movement sensor hardware to implement `wheeled-odometry` on your robot. 
```

> Because of this method of estimation, you don't have to have a specific piece of movement sensor hardware to implement `wheeled-odometry` on your robot. 

Author: ```suggestion
Because of this method of estimation, you don't have to have a specific piece of movement sensor hardware to implement `wheeled-odometry` on your robot.
```

This model uses [encoders](/components/encoder/) from [position reporting motors](/components/motor/) to get an odometry estimate of a wheeled base as it moves.

With a configured `wheeled-odometry` movement sensor, your robot calculates an estimation of the position, orientation, linear velocity, and angular velocity of the wheeled base each time `time_interval_msec` elapses during a [session](/program/apis/sessions/).
You can access these readings through the [movement sensor API](/components/movement-sensor/#api).

> For the best accuracy with odometry calculations, it is recommended you configure a time interval less of than `1000` milliseconds.

Author: ```suggestion
For the best accuracy with odometry calculations, it is recommended you configure a time interval of less than `1000` milliseconds.
```

After configuring a `wheeled-odometry` movement sensor, you can operate your base with Viam's built-in services like the [navigation service](/services/navigation/).

## Set-up requirements

To prepare your robot, attach [encoders](/components/encoder/) to each of the position-reporting motors on your base to measure their rotation.

> - Pick out motors that can report their own position, like an encoded [`roboclaw`](/components/motor/roboclaw/) or [`gpio` motors](/components/motor/gpio/) with [encoders](/components/encoder/#configuration), or the [`odrive`](/extend/modular-resources/examples/odrive/) module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Select motors that can report their own position, like an encoded [`roboclaw`](/components/motor/roboclaw/) or [`gpio` motors](/components/motor/gpio/) with [encoders](/components/encoder/#configuration), or the [`odrive`](/extend/modular-resources/examples/odrive/) module.
```

Author: LGTM done

You can access this property of a configured motor through the [motor API's `GetProperties()`](/components/motor/#getproperties).
- Configure your rover as a [wheeled base component](/components/base/wheeled/).
Make sure to configure the base width and circumference, as these measurements as a property of the base are vital for accurate odometry estimations by your movement sensor. This movement sensor accesses these values through the base's `GetProperties()` API method.
- Configure each of the position-reporting motors [as motor components](/components/motor/).
- Then, proceed to [configure](#configuration) a `wheeledodometry` movement sensor with the name of each of the motor components.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

> - Then, proceed to [configure](#configuration) a `wheeledodometry` movement sensor with the name of each of the motor components.

Author: ```suggestion
- Then, proceed to [configure](#configuration) a `wheeled-odometry` movement sensor with the name of each of the motor components.
```

## Configuration

Navigate to the **Config** tab of your robot's page in [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com).
Click on the **Components** subtab and navigate to the **Create component** menu.
Select **Raw JSON** mode.
Copy and paste the following:

```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
"name" : "<your-wheeledodometry-movement-sensor-name>",
"type" : "movement_sensor",

> "model" : "wheeledodometry",

Author: ```suggestion
"model" : "wheeled-odometry",
```

"attributes" : {
    "base" : "<your-base-name>",
    "left_motors" : ["<your-base-left-motor-name-1>", "<your-base-left-motor-name-2>"],
    "right_motors" : ["<your-base-right-motor-name-1", "your-base-right-motor-name-2>"],
    "time-interval-msec": <number>
}

> ```

Reviewer: Unsure: Does this require `depends_on` like other things that function as other components? (Like the visual odometry sensor `depends_on` a `camera`.) I think ... no?

Reviewer 2: the validation function of most built-in models appends all dependencies, they are implicit and don't need to be explicitly configured.

Reviewer 2: but they will show up in your config once added as dependencies, you just don't have to configure them as a user - we use the helper functions to do that for you.

Reviewer: Cool, thanks @randhid !

Fill in and edit the attributes as applicable.

## Attributes

The following attributes are available for `wheeledodometry` movement sensors:

| Name | Type | Inclusion | Description |
| ---- | ---- | --------- | ----------- |
| `base` | string | **Required** | The `name` of the [base](/components/base/) to which the encoders making up this movement sensor are wired. |

> | `left_motors` | object | **Required** | A list holding the name of each of the bases' left [position-reporting motors](/components/motor/gpio/). |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `left_motors` | object | **Required** | A list containing the name of each of the bases' left [position-reporting motors](/components/motor/gpio/). |
```

Author: lgtm done

> | `right_motors` | object | **Required** | A list holding the name of each of the bases' right [position-reporting motors](/components/motor/gpio/). |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `right_motors` | object | **Required** | A list containing the name of each of the bases' right [position-reporting motors](/components/motor/gpio/). |
```

> | `time_interval_msec` | number | Optional | The time in between each wheeled odometry calculation. <br> Default: `500.0` </br> |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `time_interval_msec` | number | Optional | The time in milliseconds between each wheeled odometry calculation.<br>Default: `500.0`</br> |
```

Author: Done, TY for catching

---
title: "Configure a wheeled-odometry movement sensor"
linkTitle: "wheeled-odometry"
type: "docs"
description: "Configure a wheeled-odometry movement sensor."
images: ["/icons/components/imu.svg"]
tags: ["movement sensor", "components", "movement sensor"]
# SMEs: Rand, Martha
---

Configure a `wheeled-odometry` movement sensor to implement _wheeled odometry_ on your robot.

_Wheeled odometry_ is the estimation of the rate of change of position, orientation, linear velocity, and angular velocity using the dimensions of a base, calculated by measuring the movement of the motors through encoders.
This model uses [encoders](/components/encoder/) from [position reporting motors](/components/motor/) to get an odometry estimate of a wheeled base as it moves.

With a configured `wheeled-odometry` movement sensor, after every time `time_interval_msec` elapses during a [session](/program/apis/sessions/), your robot calculates an estimation of the position, orientation, linear velocity, and angular velocity of the wheeled base.

> You can access these readings through the [movement sensor API](/components/movement-sensor/#api).

Author: ```suggestion
You can access these readings through the [movement sensor API](/components/movement-sensor/#api).
For best accuracy, it is recommended you configure a time interval less of than `1000` milliseconds. 
```

---
title: "Configure a wheeled-odometry movement sensor"
linkTitle: "wheeled-odometry"
type: "docs"
description: "Configure a wheeled-odometry movement sensor."
images: ["/icons/components/imu.svg"]
tags: ["movement sensor", "components", "movement sensor"]
# SMEs: Rand, Martha
---

Configure a `wheeled-odometry` movement sensor to implement _wheeled odometry_ on your robot.

> _Wheeled odometry_ is the estimation of position, orientation, linear velocity, and angular velocity using the dimensions of a base.

Reviewer 2: "and calculating how each variable has changed using the movement of the motors through encoders."

Author: Think have addressed @randhid 
If not, lmk and will add more closely word-for-word

> _Wheeled odometry_ is the estimation of position, orientation, linear velocity, and angular velocity using the dimensions of a base.

Author: ```suggestion
_Wheeled odometry_ is the estimation of the rate of change of position, orientation, linear velocity, and angular velocity using the dimensions of a base, calculated by measuring the movement of the motors through encoders.
```

> _Wheeled odometry_ is the estimation of the rate of change of position, orientation, linear velocity, and angular velocity using the dimensions of a base, calculated by measuring the movement of the motors through encoders.

Author: @randhid Implemented suggestion into here, lmk if you want me to do word for word addition!

Reviewer 2: Nope - this is good!

> This model uses [encoders](/components/encoder/) from [position reporting motors](/components/motor/) to get an odometry estimate from a wheeled base.

Author: LGTM done

> With a configured `wheeled-odometry` movement sensor, after every time `time_interval_msec` elapses during a [session](/program/apis/sessions/), your robot calculates an estimation of the position, orientation, linear velocity, and angular velocity of the wheeled base.

Author: Will add, that seems helpful! Thank you!

> With a configured `wheeled-odometry` movement sensor, after every time `time_interval_msec` elapses during a [session](/program/apis/sessions/), your robot calculates an estimation of the position, orientation, linear velocity, and angular velocity of the wheeled base.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With a configured `wheeled-odometry` movement sensor, your robot calculates an estimation of the position, orientation, linear velocity, and angular velocity of the wheeled base each time `time_interval_msec` elapses during a [session](/program/apis/sessions/).
```

opt nit: Slight reshuffle for clarity if you agree.

> With a configured `wheeled-odometry` movement sensor, after every time `time_interval_msec` elapses during a [session](/program/apis/sessions/), your robot calculates an estimation of the position, orientation, linear velocity, and angular velocity of the wheeled base.

Author: LGTM, applied!!

You can access these readings through the [movement sensor API](/components/movement-sensor/#api).

> For best accuracy, it is recommended you configure a time interval less of than `1000` milliseconds. 

Author: ```suggestion
For best accuracy, it is recommended you configure a time interval less of than `1000` milliseconds.
```

After configuring a `wheeled-odometry` movement sensor, you can operate your base with Viam's built-in services like the [navigation service](/services/navigation/).

## Set-up requirements

To prepare your robot, attach [encoders](/components/encoder/) to each of the position-reporting motors on your base to measure their rotation.

> - Pick out motors that can report their own position, like the [`roboclaw`](/components/motor/roboclaw/) or [`gpio` motors](/components/motor/gpio/) with [encoders](/components/encoder/#configuration).

Reviewer 2: I had a type in the last comment, here's what i meant:
```suggestion
- Pick out motors that can report their own position, like an encoded [`roboclaw`](/components/motor/roboclaw/) or [`gpio` motors](/components/motor/gpio/) with [encoders](/components/encoder/#configuration), or the [`odrve`](/components/motor/odrive/) module.
```

Author: LGTM done

> You can access this property of a configured motor through the [motor API's `GetProperties()`](/components/motor/#getproperties).

Reviewer 3: the only API changes were adding wheel circumference to base. you could maybe in the next line (27) add a sentence explaining that the wheeledodometry movement sensor will use the base width and circumference from that base component to calculate everything but I don't think it's vital to add

> You can access this property of a configured motor through the [motor API's `GetProperties()`](/components/motor/#getproperties).

Author: Gotcha. I think as that's more on the base client side I would err on side of not putting it on this page unless @randhid you think add?

> You can access this property of a configured motor through the [motor API's `GetProperties()`](/components/motor/#getproperties).

Reviewer 2: Add - it won't work if you don't populate that property and it defaults to zero, and we're mentioning the motor client's properties values that are important here, this also needs a base with that client's properties present.

> You can access this property of a configured motor through the [motor API's `GetProperties()`](/components/motor/#getproperties).

Author: Ok, cool, will add!

> You can access this property of a configured motor through the [motor API's `GetProperties()`](/components/motor/#getproperties).

Author: Added on line 29-- LMK if needs more

> - Pick out motors that can report their own position, like an encoded [`roboclaw`](/components/motor/roboclaw/) or [`gpio` motors](/components/motor/gpio/) with [encoders](/components/encoder/#configuration), or the [`odrive`](/components/motor/odrive/) module.

Author: ```suggestion
- Pick out motors that can report their own position, like an encoded [`roboclaw`](/components/motor/roboclaw/) or [`gpio` motors](/components/motor/gpio/) with [encoders](/components/encoder/#configuration), or the [`odrive`](/extend/modular-resources/examples/odrive/) module.
```

You can access this property of a configured motor through the [motor API's `GetProperties()`](/components/motor/#getproperties).

> - Configure your rover as a [wheeled base component](/components/base/wheeled/).

Author: ```suggestion
- Configure your rover as a [wheeled base component](/components/base/wheeled/).
Make sure to configure the base width and circumference, as these measurements as a property of the base are vital for accurate odometry estimations by your movement sensor.
```

> - Configure an [encoder component](/components/encoder/#configuration) for each of the encoders you attached to the position-reporting motors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Author: LGTM done

> - Then, proceed to [configure](#configuration) a `wheeledodometry` movement sensor with the name of each of the encoder components.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Then, proceed to [configure](#configuration) a `wheeledodometry` movement sensor with the name of each of the motor components.
```

Author: Done, sorry for the confusion! Should have updated this before

It reports its own position with a built-in encoded motor.

{{% /alert %}}

## Configuration

Navigate to the **Config** tab of your robot's page in [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com).
Click on the **Components** subtab and navigate to the **Create component** menu.
Select **Raw JSON** mode.
Copy and paste the following:

```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
"name" : "<your-wheeledodometry-movement-sensor-name>",
"type" : "movement_sensor",
"model" : "wheeledodometry",
"attributes" : {
    "base" : "<your-base-name>",
    "left_motors" : ["<your-base-left-motor-name-1>", "<your-base-left-motor-name-2>"],
    "right_motors" : ["<your-base-right-motor-name-1", "your-base-right-motor-name-2>"],
    "time-interval-msec": <number>
}
```

Fill in and edit the attributes as applicable.

## Attributes

The following attributes are available for `wheeledodometry` movement sensors:

| Name | Type | Inclusion | Description |
| ---- | ---- | --------- | ----------- |
| `base` | string | **Required** | The `name` of the [base](/components/base/) to which the encoders making up this movement sensor are wired. |

> | `left_motors` | object | **Required** | A struct holding the name of each of the bases' left [position-reporting motors](/components/motor/gpio/). |

Reviewer 3: [nit] I might be wrong, but it seems more like a list than a struct? whatever you think. same for right motors on next line

Author: No, you're right! Thank you! Updating

> | `left_motors` | object | **Required** | A struct holding the name of each of the bases' left [position-reporting motors](/components/motor/gpio/). |

Author: ```suggestion
| `left_motors` | object | **Required** | A list holding the name of each of the bases' left [position-reporting motors](/components/motor/gpio/). |
```

> | `right_motors` | object | **Required** | A struct holding the name of each of the bases' right [position-reporting motors](/components/motor/gpio/). |

Author: ```suggestion
| `right_motors` | object | **Required** | A list holding the name of each of the bases' right [position-reporting motors](/components/motor/gpio/). |
```

You can access these readings through the [movement sensor API](/components/movement-sensor/#api).
For the best accuracy with odometry calculations, it is recommended you configure a time interval less of than `1000` milliseconds.

After configuring a `wheeled-odometry` movement sensor, you can operate your base with Viam's built-in services like the [navigation service](/services/navigation/).

## Set-up requirements

To prepare your robot, attach [encoders](/components/encoder/) to each of the position-reporting motors on your base to measure their rotation.

- Pick out motors that can report their own position, like an encoded [`roboclaw`](/components/motor/roboclaw/) or [`gpio` motors](/components/motor/gpio/) with [encoders](/components/encoder/#configuration), or the [`odrive`](/extend/modular-resources/examples/odrive/) module.
You can access this property of a configured motor through the [motor API's `GetProperties()`](/components/motor/#getproperties).
- Configure your rover as a [wheeled base component](/components/base/wheeled/).

> Make sure to configure the base width and circumference, as these measurements as a property of the base are vital for accurate odometry estimations by your movement sensor.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Make sure to configure the base width and circumference, as these measurements as a property of the base are vital for accurate odometry estimations by your movement sensor. This movement sensor accesses these values through the base's GetProperties API.
```

Author: Done, thank you!

- Configure each of the position-reporting motors [as motor components](/components/motor/).
- Then, proceed to [configure](#configuration) a `wheeledodometry` movement sensor with the name of each of the motor components.

> {{% alert title="Tip" color="tip" %}}
> 
> The `roboclaw` motor does not require you to configure [encoder components](/components/encoder/#configuration) for use with the `wheeled-odometry` movement sensor.
> It reports its own position with a built-in encoded motor.
> 
> {{% /alert %}}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

Author: Done, NP.
